# Knapsack-Genetic-Algo

The genes for the initial population was a randomly generated integer value of either 1 or 0. 1 representing the box being selected and 0 representing the box is not selected. The random gene selection occurs for the length of the amount of boxes available. This creates the chromosome and is done by the spawn_individual() function. The population is created by creating an array of chromosomes. The spawn_population() function does this by calling the spawn_individual() function for a population twice the length of the number of boxes available. The population is larger than the amount of chromosomes to increase the chance of a genetic mutation later on.

The fitness function calculates the fitness of a chromosome in the population. It does this by keeping track of the total value (total_value) and the total weight (total_weight) of the chromosome (target) by adding the respective weight and value to the local variables if a gene is selected. It then compares the total weight to the maximum capacity, giving it a fitness value of 0 if it is overweight. It then compares the total value with the desired minimum value and gives the chromosome a fitness of 0 if it is undervalue. It then returns the total value of a chromosome that meets the specifications. The reason for this is to make the chromosomes with a high fitness value more appealing in the selection process.

The selection method used in the program is a rank selection. The population is sorted according to their fitness values, with the fittest chromosomes appearing at the start of the population and the lowest fitness at the bottom. The population the calls on the evolution method (evolove_population()). This method takes the fittest chromosomes as the parents for the next generation (the top 20% of the population) as well as some random “unfit” chromosomes to ensure variety (less than 5%). They are then sent to mutate.

The mutation method (mutate()) used is an optimization based planning mutation. The selects a random gene from a chromosome and flips the bit (i.e. if it is a 1 it would become a 0 and vice versa). The mutation occurs at a rate of less than 8% for each chromosome. This is to try to include new gene values and to increase the population pool. The mutation rate is kept small to avoid randomness in the population. If the mutation chance is larger than a randomly generated value than the gene would mutate. Mutation occurs in both parents and children of the population.
